.. _`amorphous app`:

Amorphous materials
===================

.. note::

    See :ref:`fem api` and :ref:`radial fourier api` for API references


LiberTEM offers methods to determine the local order or crystallinity of
amorphous and nanocrystalline materials.

Fluctuation EM
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The diffraction pattern of amorphous materials show a characteristic ring of
intensity around the zero-order diffraction peak that is a result of near-range
ordering of the atoms in the material. Any local ordering within the interaction
volume of beam and sample will lead to increased "speckle", i.e. intensity
fluctuations within this ring, since regions with local ordering will diffract
the beam to preferred directions similar to a crystal. For Fluctuation EM
:cite:`Gibson1997`, the standard deviation within this ring is calculated to
obtain a measure of this local ordering.

GUI use
-------

You can select `FEM` from the "Add Analysis" menu in the GUI to add a
Fluctuation EM Analysis.

..  figure:: ./images/fem/fem-select.png

Use the controls on the left to position the ring-shaped selector over the
region you'd like to analyze and then click "Apply".

..  figure:: ./images/fem/fem.png

Pick mode or average over ROI comes in handy to inspect individual frames or
regions of interest:

..  figure:: ./images/fem/fem-pick.png

Sample data: Metallic glass courtesy of Shuai Wei
<shuai.wei@physik.rwth-aachen.de>, RWTH Aachen; Alexander Kuball, Universit채t
des Saarlandes; Hongchu Du <h.du@fz-juelich.de>, ER-C, Forschungszentrum J체lich.

Scripting interface
-------------------

LiberTEM supports this with the :class:`~libertem.udf.FEM.FEMUDF` and
:meth:`~libertem.udf.FEM.run_fem` method.

.. _`radialfourier app`:

Radial Fourier Series
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. toctree::

   radialfourier

Fluctuation EM doesn't evaluate the spatial distribution of intensity. It only
works if enough intensity accumulates in each pixel so that local ordering leads
to larger intensity variations than just random noise, i.e. if statistical
variations from shot noise average out and variations introduced by the sample
dominate.

If most of the detector pixels are only hit with one electron or none, the
standard deviation between detector positions in a region of interest is the
same, even if pixels that received electrons are spatially close, while other
regions received no intensity. That means Fluctuation EM doesn't produce
contrast between amorphous and crystalline regions if the detector has a high
resolution, and/or if only low intensity is scattered into the region of
interest.

The Radial Fourier Series Analysis solves this problem by calculating a Fourier
series in a ring-shaped region instead of just evaluating the standard
deviation. The reference :cite:`6980942` describes a previous application of
this method as a descriptor for feature extraction from images. The angle of a
pixel relative to the user-defined center point of the diffraction pattern is
used as a phase angle for the Fourier series.

Since `diffraction patterns usually show characteristic
<http://xrayweb.chem.ou.edu/notes/symmetry.html>`_ `symmetries
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friedel%27s_law>`_, the strength of the Fourier
coefficients of orders 2, 4 and 6 highlight regions with crystalline order for
even the lowest intensities. With the `relationship between variance in real
space and power spectral density in frequency space
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parseval%27s_theorem>`_, the sum of all
coefficients that are larger than zero is equivalent to the standard deviation,
i.e. Fluctuation EM. Only summing coefficients from lower orders corresponds
Fluctuation EM on a smoothened dataset.

The phase angle of selected coefficients, for example first or second order, can
be used for in-plane orientation mapping similar to :cite:`Panova2019`.

Please note that this method is new and experimental and still needs to be
validated further. If you are interested in helping us with applications and
validations, that would be highly appreciated!

GUI use
-------

You can select "Radial Fourier" from the "Add Analysis" menu in the GUI to add a
Radial Fourier Series Analysis.

..  figure:: ./images/radialfourier/select.png 

Use the controls on the left to position the ring-shaped selector over the
region you'd like to analyze and then click "Apply".

..  figure:: ./images/radialfourier/radialfourier.png

Under the right-hand side image you can select the channel to display. Available
are predominant order, absolute value, phase angle and a cubehelix vector field
visualization of the complex number. The orders larger than zero are all plotted
on the same range and are normalized by the zero-order component for each scan
position to make the components comparable and eliminate the influence of
absolute intensity variations in the visual display.

You can select entries with the arrow keys on the keyboard in case the menu is
outside the browser window. Your help with a more user-friendly GUI
implementation would be highly appreciated!

..  figure:: ./images/radialfourier/radialfourier-channel.png

Pick mode comes in handy to inspect individual frames:

..  figure:: ./images/radialfourier/radialfourier-pick.png

Sample data: Metallic glass courtesy of Shuai Wei
<shuai.wei@physik.rwth-aachen.de>, RWTH Aachen; Alexander Kuball, Universit채t
des Saarlandes; Hongchu Du <h.du@fz-juelich.de>, ER-C, Forschungszentrum J체lich.

Scripting interface
-------------------

The scripting interface
:meth:`~libertem.api.Context.create_radial_fourier_analysis` and
:class:`~libertem.analysis.radialfourier.RadialFourierAnalysis` allows to
calculate more than one bin at a time and influence the number of orders that
are calculated. It relies on the sparse matrix back-end for MaskJob and allows
to calculate many orders for many bins at once with acceptable efficiency.

Having a fine-grained analysis with many orders calculated as a function of
radius allows for a number of additional processing and analysis steps. `Follow
this link to a Jupyter notebook. <radialfourier.ipynb>`_

.. rubric:: Reference

See :ref:`fem api` and :ref:`radial fourier api` for API references!
